# PhonologicalNetworks - Updated 5th April 2022

Data and code for the project 'Phonological Networks and Systematicity in Early Lexical Acquisition' (Laing, in prep).

This analysis draws on two corpora:

Providence (US English); 5 infants (3 females) from Demuth et al, 2006
Lyon (French); 4 infants (2 females) from Demuth & Tremblay, 2008

Demuth, Katherine, Jennifer Culbertson, & Jennifer Alter. 2006. Word-minimality, Epenthesis, and Coda Licensing in the Acquisition of English. Language & Speech, 49, 137-174.
Demuth, K. & A. Tremblay (2008). Prosodically-conditioned variability in children's production of French determiners. Journal of Child Language, 35, 99-127.

Early on in lexical acquisition, infants' early words tend to be phonologically similar to one another. This may reflect a systematic approach to acquistion, as infants draw on 'whole word' structures (cf. Vihman, 2014, 2019) in early production, whereby they adapt newly-acquired forms to fit existing dominant phonological structures in their lexicon. This reflects a 'rich-get-richer' approach to phonological acquisition, also known as *preferential attachment* in network science, where new words are acquired that are similar to (and therefore connect to) existing highly-connected words in the lexicon (or network). This contrasts with recent network analyses of lexical acquisition (Fourtassi et al., 2010) showing that connectivity in the learning environment is the key predictor in learning (i.e. *preferential acquisition*). However, previous studies of network growth in lexical acquisition have drawn on norming data taken from thousands of children, which does not capture the expected variability in early phonological development. In this study, phonetic transcriptions of nine infants' word productions were analysed from word onset to age 2;6. Network growth models were generated for each participant to test whether acquisition was best modelled through preferential attachment or preferential aquisition. Results show that both models of growth can explain early acquistion, but the preferential attachment model was more convincing across the board. This suggests that infants' early words are systematically acquired, such that newly-acquired words are phonologically similar to existing words in the network.  This approach may help infants address the challenges of word production in early development, when memory, planning and articulatory capacity are simultaneously limited.

This script generates the code for the manuscript. The files used in the script are as follows:

1. **globalthresholds_AOP**: this binds two subsets of data, one from each corpus.

This dataset shows the degree of each word in each child's global network, with a connectivity threshold of 0.25. 
The variables in this dataset are as follows:

- *threshold*: Threshold (scaled) of degree at which two words in the data count as connected, between 0.1-1. This data is filtered for E=0.25.
-*age*: Set at 30 to show the global network (all words produced by 30 months) for each child.
- *gloss1*: Target word in each child's data, matched to words on the respective language's CDI.
- *degree*: Number of other words (nodes) that each word in the network connects to.
- *threshold*: Set at 0.25 for this analysis; z score of phonological distance that establishes 2 words as being connected in the network.
- *AOP*: Age at which each word in the network was first produced.
- *degree_z*: Z score of *degree*.


2. **regression_data**: again, this binds together two sets of data, one for each corpus.

This dataset includes the PAT and PAQ growth values for use in the logistic regression models. The variables are as follows:

- *gloss1*: Target word in each child's data, matched to words on the respective language's CDI.
- *age*: Each month in the data is included for each child, in order to determine whether or not a word was produced in a given month.
- *PAT_val*: Raw PAT growth values, generated by establishing the mean degree of all the words that *gloss1* would connect to if it were acquired.
- *AOP*: Age at which each word in the network was first produced.
- *PAQ_target*: Raw PAQ growth values, generated based on target phonological forms by establishing the degree of *gloss1* in the target global network.
- *PAQ_actual*: Raw PAQ growth values, generated based on actual phonological forms by establishing the degree of *gloss1* in the actual global network.
- *learned_next*: Binomial variable to determine whether *gloss1* was acquired in the following month (*age*+1), 0 = not acquired, 1 = acquired.
- *Targetphon*: Word length (in phonemes) of the Target form.
- *vocab_month*: total vocabulary size at *AOP*.
- *AOP_scaled*: *AOP* value scaled and centred.
- *length_scaled*: *Targetphon* value scaled and centred.
- *PAT_scaled*: *PAT_val* value scaled and centred.
- *PAQ_scaled_target*: *PAQ_target* value scaled and centred.
- *PAQ_scaled_actual*: *PAQ_actual* value scaled and centred.
- *total_freq*: frequency of *gloss1* in caregiver input in the given child's data.
- *freq_scaled*: *total_freq* value scaled and centred.
- *vocab_scaled*: *vocab_month* value scaled and centred.
- *age_scaled*: *age* value scaled and centred.

3. **globalsmallworlddata**: again, this binds together two sets of data, one for each corpus.

This dataset includes the network properties relevant to small-world networks, generated using the igraph() package. These data are established by calculating the network size and degree for each child's data in each month. Average path length, mean degree and clustering coefficient (average and global) are then calculated for each monthly network. Variables in this dataset are as follows:

- *age*: Month in each child's dataset
- *path_length*: Mean path length for each monthly network.
- *mean_k*: Mean degree for all nodes in each month.
- *numNodes*: Network size (number of nodes in the network).
- *clust_coef_avg*: Mean clustering coefficient for each monthly network.

In addition, the following variables occur across datasets:

- *Speaker*: Individual subject name from the corpus.
- *data_type*: Actual or Target data; derived from whether or not the data uses infants' actual phonological productions or the adult target form.
- *corpus*: English (Providence) or French (Lyon).
